Case:  MD 09                                                             Physician:  MD 
Date:  August 8, 2009                                                          
Medical Consultant:    MD 
 
 
1.  Detailed Chronological Analysis:  The complaint initiated by the Arizona Medical Board against
MD alleges that there was a failure to evaluate a patient,
with syncope and a thoracic aneurysm for an abdominal aneurysm. 
The patient was a 73 year old female with a history of hypertension, hypothyroidism and depression 
who presented to the Hospital emergency department on 03/16/2006 with the chief 
complaint of syncope.  Two days prior to admission, the patient passed out as she was getting out of the 
shower.  She does not recall the length of time that she was unconscious. She admitted to experiencing 
at least one similar episode previously.  She also admitted to never having a medical workup for this.  
The patient was in Tucson, visiting from Sacramento, Ca. 
According to the documented initial evaluation by the emergency department physician at 
Hospital, the only pertinent physical finding was a right periorbital hematoma.  Her vital signs were 
stable and she was in a normal sinus rhythm.  The diagnostic workup showed a normal CBC and 
electrolyte panel but she did have an elevated d dimer.  The chest  x ray, an AP portable, showed a 
prominent aortic knob and calcification of same.  The CT scan of the brain showed a right lateral 
maxillary sinus wall fracture with blood in the sinus cavity.  The elevated d dimer prompted the ordering 
of a CT scan of the pulmonary arteries.  This examination showed no evidence of pulmonary emboli but 
it did demonstrate ectasia and diffuse atherosclerotic changes of the thoracic aorta as well as a discreet 
aneurysm measuring 4.9 5.0cm at the level of the diaphragm.  A second small aneurysm was also noted 
in the proximal celiac artery.  The scan stopped at this level and I can find no images of the rest of the 
abdominal aorta. 
Based upon the finding of the scan, a vascular surgical consultation was obtained.  Dr.
 evaluated the patient.  He documented a normal physical examination including the neck and 
abdomen.  His recommendations were that the work up for syncope should continue because the 
patient required no acute intervention for the thoraco proximal abdominal aortic aneurysm and added 
that the aneurysm should be followed frequently by a vascular surgeon in her hometown of 
Sacramento, Ca.  The patient actually expressed a desire for this as Dr. did offer to have the 
aneurysm taken care of in Tucson. 
Because of the discovery of the thoraco proximal abdominal aortic aneurysm and in spite of the normal 
physical examination, the entire aorta should have been imaged radiographically or sonographically. 
The patient remained stable throughout the subsequent hospitalization and was found to have 
witnessed and well documented episodes of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular 
response.  This indicates a sick sinus syndrome and the most likely etiology of her syncope. 
The cardiologist, Dr. determined that because of the patient’s cardiac issues, she should 
be anticoagulated and worked up for coronary artery disease.  In addition she was immediately started 
on anti arrythmic medication.  She did undergo a nuclear stress test which was negative for ischemia 
and an echocardiogram corroborated normal left ventricular function. 
On his weekend rounds, Dr. ordered a carotid duplex scan on 3/18/2006 which showed no 
hemodynamically significant extracranial carotid disease. 
The patient was discharged from  Hospital on 3/19/2006 on warfarin, sotalol, vytorin, and 
keflex.  She was to be followed by  as an outpatient.  She was in a normal sinus rhythm 
at the time of her discharge. 
On 3/21/2006, two days following her discharge from  Hospital, she presented to the 
Medical Center complaining of a two day history of right lower quadrant pain.  The 
pain started in her right lower quadrant and groin on the day prior to admission with progressive 
worsening.  The pain was gradual in onset and radiated around to her lower back on the same side.  This 
symptom complex included nausea and vomiting.  During her transport to the hospital by private 
vehicle, she had a brief episode of non responsiveness associated with bladder and bowel incontinence. 
Upon presentation to the emergency department her BP was 124/67 with a regular pulse of 54 beats 
per minute and she was fully awake and oriented.  Her physical examination was remarkable for mild 
right lower quadrant and peri umbilical tenderness.  There was no rebound tenderness or guarding 
noted.  Distal lower extremity pulses were not documented in the record.   The hemoglobin 
concentration was 11.2gm/dl and hematocrit 31.9% as compared to 15.4 and 45.2% on 3/17/2006. 
According to the emergency department physician, an acute aortic dissection was high on the 
differential diagnosis list.  Because of this, a CT scan with contrast of the abdomen was ordered stat.  It 
was obvious on this examination that the patient had a ruptured infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm 
measuring greater than 8 cm in maximal diameter.  The patient was taken to the operating theater 
immediately. 
Intraoperatively, the patient was found to have a freely ruptured 8.3 cm bilobed infrarenal abdominal 
aortic aneurysm with a large amount of blood in the right retroperitoneal space and free blood in the 
peritoneal cavity. 
An attempt to repair same was undertaken but the patient expired on the operating table.  She 
essentially had uncontrollable hemorrhage apparently from a lacerated left renal/gonadal vein complex, 
most likely iatrogenic occurring during the haste in attempting to control the aorta proximal to the 
ruptured area. 
2.  Proposed Standard of Care:  The standard of care in a 73 year old patient with a history of 
hypertension, and a newly discovered asymptomatic 4.9 5.0 cm aortic aneurysm at the level of the 
diaphragm and celiac artery involvement, is to evaluate the entire abdominal aorta to rule out a 
significant infrarenal component.  Vascular surgeons are fully aware the greater than 90% of Aortic  
Aneurysms are located in the infrarenal aorta.  The dearth or absence of symptoms referable directly to 
the aneurysm does not preclude the evaluation of the entire aorta. 
I conclude, therefore, that the standard of care was not met in this case. 
3.  Deviation From The Standard of Care:  Failure to image the entire abdominal aorta in the known 
presence of thoraco proximal abdominal aortic aneurysm. 
4.  Actual Harm Identified:  The patient’s demise from a very large ruptured infrarenal abdominal aortic 
aneurysm which had not been detected due to lack of an appropriate index of suspicion and subsequent 
failure to have the abdominal aorta imaged. 
5.  Potential Harm Identified:  The potential harm was the failure to detect this very large infrarenal 
abdominal aortic aneurysm predisposing it to rupture. 
6.  Aggravating Factors:  There are no aggravating factors which would indicate egregious behavior. 
7.  Mitigating Factors:  The focus of this patient’s cause for hospitalization was the syncopal episode 
which she experienced.  I am still unsure nor am I able to glean any information as to why the very large 
infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm was not palpable by several different examiners in a patient with 
a BMI of 24.9.  Also, I do not see documentation of any examiner placing a stethoscope on the patient’s 
abdomen to auscultate for bruits.  In his response letter to the Board, Dr.  states that he 
examined the patient’s abdomen but his progress notes do not reflect this.  If the failure to detect the 
infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm has any mitigating factors, it is the focus on the patient’s workup 
for the problem at hand and attributing the thoraco proximal abdominal aortic aneurysm to being an 
asymptomatic incidental finding on a pulmonary artery scan.   However, the index of suspicion for 
additional involvement of the aorta distally should have been much higher. 
8.  Consultant’s Summary:  Based upon my knowledge and experience as a Cardiovascular and Thoracic 
surgeon for the past 23 years, I conclude that the patient, Ms.  was not completely 
worked up in order to exclude an infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm. 
Over 90% of degenerative or atherosclerotic aneurysms develop in the infrarenal segment of the aorta.  
Knowing that the patient had significant ectasia of the ascending, tranverse and descending thoracic 
aorta along with significant eccentric calcification of the aortic wall, in addition to the known 4.9 5.0 cm 
rather discreet aneurysm of the distal thoracic proximal abdominal aorta and celiac artery, is an 
indication for imaging the rest of the intraabdominal aorta regardless of the patient’s symptoms.  The 
vast majority of infrarenal aneurysms are asymptomatic. 
Another fact that I have difficulty reconciling is the lack of physical findings on the multiple abdominal 
examinations which the patient underwent by several different physicians.  My reason for doubt stems 
from the fact that the patient’s aneurysm measured 8.3cm in maximal diameter and her BMI was 24.9.  
An aneurysm of this size does not grow to this magnitude in a short period of time.   Also, when Dr. 
examined the patient’s abdomen as he states in his response letter to the board, he should 
have stated so in his written progress notes. 
Had the abdominal aorta been imaged in its entirety, the very large infrarenal abdominal aortic 
aneurysm would have been discovered and the patient would have undergone the appropriate 
procedure under quite different circumstances and with a markedly reduced risk.  In other words, she 
would have not been discharged from  Hospital because an infrarenal abdominal aortic 
aneurysm that large is an urgent, bordering on emergent indication for repair.  There are not many 
vascular surgeons which would disagree with this statement. 
In conclusion, this is a most unfortunate case and although any retrospective review such as this is 
imperfect because it is difficult to determine the involved practioner’s state of mind, I do believe 
strongly that the primary focus was on the patient’s syncope.  This was totally and unequivocally 
appropriate and wonderfully worked up.  However, when the 4.9cm aortic aneurysm was discovered at 
the level of the diaphragm along with the celiac artery involvement, the rest of the aorta should have 
been imaged.  Had this been done there is a high probability that the outcome would have been much 
more favorable.  I may add, in no uncertain terms, that the radiologist reading and/or performing the 
pulmonary artery CT scan should have continued imaging the rest of the aorta at that juncture.  I do not 
think he/she needed an order or permission for same. 
I have to state that the Board’s allegation of “failure to evaluate a patient with syncope and thoracic 
aneurysm for abdominal aortic aneurysm” has merit and the care which this patient received on this 
point fell below the standard of care.   
9.  Records Reviewed:   
     1.  Communication from        7/15/2009 
     2.  Initial complaint letter   7/15/2009 
     3.  Licensee response   7/15/2009 
     4.   Hospital Records   7/15/2009 
     5.  Medical Center Records   7/15/2009 
     6.  Image CD’s from  Hospital  7/22/2009 
     7.  Image CD from  Center  8/8/2009 
 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
 MD 
